---
id: filtering
title: Filtering
sidebar_label: Filtering
---

## Basics
You can add filter criteria to your query by calling the `where` method.

```js
Actor.findMany().where({
  firstName: { equal: 'Will' },
});
```

Filtering by multiple fields is just as simple

```js
Actor.findMany().where({
  firstName: { equal: 'Will' },
  lastName: { equal: 'Smith' },
});
```

## Operators

### Equality operators
Operators: `equal` and `notEqual`
Available on the following types: `Boolean`, `Int`, `Float`, `String`, `ID`, `Enum`, `Date`, `DateTime`, `Time`, `JSON`, `List<Any>`

```js
Actor.findMany().where({
  firstName: { notEqual: 'Joaquin' },
});
```

:::tip

Passing `null` to either `equal` or `notEqual` will result in the underlying predicate being "IS NULL" or "IS NOT NULL", respectively, as opposed to "= NULL" or "!= NULL".

:::

### Greater/less than operators
Operators: `greaterThan`, `greaterThanOrEqual`, `lessThan`, and `lessThanOrEqual`
Available on the following types: `Int`, `Float`, `String`, `ID`, `Date`, `DateTime`, `Time`

```js
Film.findMany().where({
  stars: { greaterThanOrEqual: 3.5 },
});
```

### Pattern matching operators
Operators: `like`, `notLike`, `iLike`, and `notILike`
Available on the following types: `String`

```js
Film.findMany().where({
  title: { iLike: '%Dark Knight%' },
});
```

### List membership operators
Operators: `in` and `notIn`
Available on the following types: `Int`, `Float`, `String`, `ID`, `Enum`, `Date`, `DateTime`, `Time`

```js
Actor.findMany().where({
  firstName: { in: ['Hailey', 'Aubrey', 'Julie'] },
});
```

### List operators
Operators: `contains`, `containedBy`, and `overlaps`
Available on the following types: `List<Any>`

```js
Actor.findMany().where({
  awards: { containedBy: ['Golden Globe', 'Oscar'] },
});
```

### JSON operators
Operators: `contains`, `containedBy`, `hasKey`, `hasAnyKeys`, and `hasAllKeys`
Available on the following types: `JSON`

```js
Actor.findMany().where({
  otherDetails: { hasKey: 'discography' },
});
```

### Logical operators

There are three logical operators -- `and`, `or` and `not`. Both `and` and `or` accept an array of objects, while not accepts a single object. These operators can be combined to craft complex where conditions like this:

```js
Film.findMany().where({
  or: [
    {
      { title: { equal: 'Monty Python and the Holy Grail' } },
    },
    {
      and: [
        { stars: { greaterThan: 3 } },
        { stars: { lessThanOrEqual: 4.5 } },
        {
          not: {
            title: { like: '%Brian%' },
          },
        },
      ],
    },
  ]
});
```

## Filtering by related model fields

### One-to-one relationships

You can filter by any of the related model's fields.

```js
Film.findMany().where({
  language: {
    name: { equal: 'French' },
  },
});
```

### One-to-many and many-to-many relationships

You can filter by any of the related model's fields. A row will be returned if *any* of the related models satisfy the conditon.

```js
Film.findMany().where({
  actors: {
    lastName: { equal: 'Glover' },
  },
});
```

In order to get results only when *all* of the related models satisfy the condition, we need to use the inverse of the condition and use the `not` operator:

```js
Film.findMany().where({
  not: {
    actors: {
      lastName: { notEqual: 'Glover' },
    },
  },
});
```

In order to get results only when *none* of the related models satisfy the condition, we also use the `not` operator but we don't inverse the condition:

```js
Film.findMany().where({
  not: {
    actors: {
      lastName: { equal: 'Glover' },
    },
  },
});
```

In addition to related model fields, it's also possible to filter by aggregate values. For example, by count:

```js
Language.findMany().where({
  films: { count: { greaterThan: 100 } },
});
```

or another aggregate value like `sum`, `avg`, `min` or `max`:

```js
Language.findMany().where({
  films: { avg: { rentalCost: { greaterThan: 5.5 } } },
});
```

## The `@where` directive

If you're writing a resolver, it's feasible to just transform whatever arguments you expose for the field into an object that can then be passed to the `where` method. For example:

```js
const where = { firstName: { equals: args.firstName } }
return Actor.findMany().resolveInfo(info).where(where)
```

However, you may want to support all of the functionality shown above. In this case, you can just use the `@where` directive to create the appropriate `where` argument on your field for you.

```graphql
type Query {
  films: [Film!]! @where
}
```

:::tip

If you use the `resolveInfo` method, you don't have to call the `where` method at all. Sqlmancer will look for an argument named `where` and modify your query builder appropriately.

:::

If the type of your field is not the model you want to use to generate the `where` argument, you can specify the model to be used.

```
type Mutation {
  deleteFilm: DeleteFilmPayload! @where(model: "Film")
}
```

## Adding on to a query builder

Using the `resolveInfo` method will modify your query builder based on the provided `where` argument. However, you may want to constrain your query even further. For example, you may want to limit the results to only match some value in your context, like the logged-in user's ID. You can utilize the `mergeWhere` method to add additional conditions to your query.

```js
Rental.findMany()
  .resolveInfo(info)
  .mergeWhere({ userId: { equal: context.user.id } })
```

Unlike the `where` method, which replaces any previously set conditions, `mergeWhere` will merge the new conditions into the existing ones. Note that the order matters here -- `resolveInfo` should be called first, otherwise it will override the values added with `mergeWhere`.
