---
id: sorting
title: Sorting
sidebar_label: Sorting
---

## Basics
You can add sorting criteria to your query by calling the `orderBy` method.

```js
// Sort by a single field
Actor.findMany().orderBy([
  { firstName: 'ASC' },
]);

// Sort by multiple fields
Actor.findMany().orderBy([
  { lastUpdated: 'DESC' },
  { id: 'ASC' },
]);
```

## Sort direction

The following sort directions are valid: `ASC`, `DESC`.

## Sorting by related model fields

### One-to-one relationships

You can sort by any of the related model's fields.

```js
Film.findMany().orderBy([{
  language: { name: 'ASC' },
}]);
```

### One-to-many and many-to-many relationships

You can also sort by aggregate values of the related model's fields. For example, using count

```js
Actor.findMany().orderBy([
  { films: { count: 'ASC' } },
]);
```

or the 'avg', 'sum', 'min' or 'max' of a field:

```js
Actor.findMany().orderBy([
  { films: { avg: { stars: 'ASC' } } },
]);
```

## The `@orderBy` directive

If you're writing a resolver, it's feasible to just transform whatever arguments you expose for the field into an object that can then be passed to the `orderBy` method. For example:

```js
const orderBy = [{ [args.sortBy]: args.sortDir }]
return Actor.findMany().resolveInfo(info).orderBy(orderBy)
```

However, you may want to support all of the functionality shown above. In this case, you can just use the `@orderBy` directive to create the appropriate `orderBy` argument on your field for you.

```graphql
type Query {
  films: [Film!]! @orderBy
}
```

:::tip

If you use the `resolveInfo` method, you don't have to call the `orderBy` method at all. Sqlmancer will look for an argument named `orderBy` and modify your query builder appropriately.

:::

If the type of your field is not the model you want to use to generate the `orderBy` argument, you can specify the model to be used.

```
type Query {
  filmFavorites: [FilmFavorite!]! @orderBy(model: "Film")
}
```

:::tip

You can also use the `@many` directive instead of applying the `@where`, `@orderBy`, `@limit` and `@offset` directives separately.

:::
