---
id: pagination
title: Pagination
sidebar_label: Pagination
---

## Basic pagination
Sqlmancer supports offset pagination using the `limit` and `offset` methods.

```js
Actor.findMany().limit(10).offset(20).execute();
```

When using the client inside a resolver, you can use the `resolveInfo` method to avoid calling the `limit` or `offset` methods altogether. Sqlmancer will look for arguments named `limit` and `offset` and modify your query builder appropriately.

```js
resolve(root, args, ctx, info) {
  return Actor.findMany().resolveInfo(info).execute();
}
```

Instead of adding those arguments directly to your field, you may also utilize the `@limit` and `@offset` directives.

:::tip

You can also use the `@many` directive instead of applying the `@where`, `@orderBy`, `@limit` and `@offset` directives separately.

:::

## Page types and `paginate`

Instead of just returning a list of a particular type, your schema can return a "Page" object instead that includes these three fields:

* `results`: a list of the paginated results
* `hasMore`: a boolean indicating whether there are more results to be fetched
* `aggregate`: an object for aggregating the values of the results

We can use the `@paginate` directive to generate the appropriate "Page" type for a particular model:

```graphql
type Query {
  actors: Actor @paginate
}
```

which will be the equivalent of doing something like this:

```graphql
type Query {
  actors: ActorPage
}

type ActorPage {
  results: [Actor!]!
  hasMore: Boolean!
  aggregate: ActorAggregate!
}

type ActorAggregate {
  count: Int!
  avg: ActorAvg!
  sum: ActorSum!
  min: ActorMin!
  max: ActorMax!
}
```

Each model provides a matching `paginate` method that can be used to populate such a field:

```
Actor.paginate()
  .selectAll()
  .hasMore()
  .limit(25)
```

:::note

The `paginate` method will return an empty object by default. Calling `hasMore` will add the `hasMore` field to the result object. Calling any of the aggregate methods, like `count` will add the aggregate field to the result object. Calling any of the select or load methods will add the `results` field to the result object.

:::

The `PaginateBuilder` returned by the `paginate` method includes a `resolveInfo` method for easy use inside a resolver:

```js
resolve(root, args, ctx, info) {
  return Actor.paginate().resolveInfo(info).execute();
}
```
The `paginate` method can be used for either paginating over a large set of results, or for aggregating field values for a particular set of records. The same methods for [sorting](sorting) and [filtering](filtering) are also available on the `PaginateBuilder`. You can read about aggregation in more depth [here](aggregation).

## Keyset pagination
While Sqlmancer doesn't explicitly support cursor-based pagination, you can still utilize keyset pagination. Keyset pagination is often more performant than offset-based pagination, particularly on large data sets. The field used as the cursor needs to be sortable and unique. For example, you can use the primary key field

```js
Film.findMany()
  .where({ id: { greaterThan: someId } })
  .orderBy([{ id: 'ASC' }])
  .limit(10);
```

If you want to sort the results by a field that isn't necessarily unique, then you can combine that field with another field that *is* unique, like the primary key

```js
Film.findMany()
  .where({
    or: [
      {
        stars: { lessThan: someValue },
      },
      {
        and: {
          stars: { equal: someValue },
          id: { greaterThan: someId },
        }
      }
    ],
  })
  .orderBy([{ stars: 'DESC' }, { id: 'ASC' }])
  .limit(10);
```
